All right, we've been studying.
I like studying.
You've been studying? Are you ready for my questions about...
Performance measures? Stuff. (laughs) That stuff.
Women in horticulture. (laughs)
(laughs) Oh, yeah. Don't do that again.
(laughs)
(laughs) I actually don't have any
?????? (laughs)
Yeah. Let's go. A-billions for apple growers.
Right.
Nearly there.
Welcome, Minister.
Yeah.
(laughs)
Uh, thanks for being, uh, nimble enough to come
five minutes early. Um, so we've got you for half an
hour, um...
Goodness.
We leave it in your hands. So, fire away and then, uh, as you know, the
committee will be bursting at the seams-
Boing. ... to ask questions.
I wouldn't expect anything else. Look, thank you, um, m- members for your time.
I appreciate you've had a long week and you've had a particularly long morning.
So, look, I'll keep my introductory mark, remarks short.
I know that the two beside me need no introduction, so I'll just kick
into it. Look, um, suffice to say, the government is absolutely
right behind our $60 billion food and fiber sector, and we really are
working hard to ensure their ongoing success.
But I'm here to talk to you today specifically about horticulture, uh, being the
first minister with that dedicated responsibility, um, for that
sector. And because of that, it's very much my job to, uh,
ensure that our work program as a government supports our fruit and veggie
growers around the country. And so I do want to take the opportunity to
acknowledge and recognize and thank them for the huge role that
they play, uh, in, in New Zealand's, um, economic recovery.
And it is thanks to their very, very hard work that we are seeing
rising export revenues. Um, economic growth is starting
to occur in the regions, so very much boosting our, our national and regional
economies, uh, and feeding not just New Zealanders, but millions and millions of
people around the world. Um, so that does need to be acknowledged.
Um, the numbers don't lie. It really is an incredible success story in
horticulture at the moment. When Ray launched the SOPE and took all the credit for
it back in June, we were looking at a 19% growth for the horticulture
sector. It's actually, the revised number is 25%.
Um, so that-
Wow.
... is huge, $8.8 billion in exports in the year-
(laughs)
... to June, uh, 30. Um, and of course, apples and kiwifruit
very much took center stage. They've both, um, posted record
numbers. Kiwifruit particularly have reached four billion.
Um, that is quite incredible because it had naturally surpassed three billion
previously. Um, that is driven by a 30% increase in export
volumes. And then apples and pears also performed very, very
strongly. They posted numbers for the first time over a billion, at $1.2
billion, uh, again thanks to, um, rising export
volumes and, and indeed prices. They really are extraordinary
results and that is why I just wanted to take a, a couple of, a minute to touch on
it. But they do show very much, uh, the hard work and resilience of those
growers. And I know members at this table, um, come from regions that have been
particularly hard-hit by, uh, incredible weather events.
And so just acknowledging the work that, that you, uh, as local MPs have done
to represent those growers. Um, as a government, we're very much
supporting the, uh, uh, Horticulture Action Plan, the Aotearoa
Horticulture Action Plan. That has been pulled together by the industry
for the industry. Um, its aim, um, coincidentally, happens to
be to, to double, uh, export revenue by 2035,
which as you'll all know is also the government's targeted goal.
Um, the first phase of that roadmap, uh, identifies
52 actions over the next three years that will really be critical to, to
bolstering that growth. Uh, and the government, for its part, has to
take responsibility for 21 of those actions.
Uh, and they include, um, areas like supporting the trade and
market access opportunity, removing all the regulatory barriers that we've been
hearing about for a number of years, um, to achieve that growth.
Uh, and then of course, what's really critical is the pragmatic on-farm support.
So, um, enabling better access to chemicals and building the
capability of that crucial workforce.
Um, and just very quickly, I also do have, happily have the delegated
responsibility for rural women. So I'm really, really proud to back the
efforts of women in our food and fiber sector.
I know we like to talk about farmers being the backbone of our economy.
Well, I would argue that it's actually the women farmers that are the backbone of
our economy. Um, so the government's provided Rural Women New Zealand in their
centenary year with a quarter of a million dollars to, to help boost them with
their, uh, on the ground support for their rural communities.
Um, they're using that funding to roll out a couple of initiatives.
One particularly is called ConnectHer, which is a project that's been rolled out in
Wairoa on the East Coast and also in Southland to connect rural
women and of course their families, um, with those services that will help
them support their economic and social, mental and physical wellbeing, and
to help reduce the isolation that a lot of those, um, communities do feel.
Um, there's also a number of initiatives we're backing, um, that foster leadership
and entrepreneurship. Uh, that includes the Activator Programme which, which
Ray has very kindly funded, uh, which is run by rural women.
Uh, it's been, been co-funded since 2019 and it helps to
turn some what start out as very niche ideas to help
grow them into viable businesses, again, to help support those
rural communities. And we've also committed, Ms.
Boyack-
(laughs)
... you'll be pleased to know, $300,000 over three years to
that (laughs)
- (laughs) Excellent. ... to that United Fresh WomenHort initiative, which she so-
Excellent.
... kindly reminded us of last time. (laughs) This is what Ray does.
He just writes checks and forgets about them.
Um, but look, very much, um, here to, to take your questions.
So I'll just close off here, but, um, I just want to really reiterate that,
that, um, our food and fibre sector is absolutely integral to the economy,
to this country. Um, for our, for my part as a minister, indeed for our part
as a government, we've, we've been really careful to really listen and, and focus
on, on what truly matters and then to, um, create policy that enables
that growth. And so look, with that, thank you very much for your time.
Very happy to take all your questions.
Very good, into questions.
Who wants to go first?
Yeah.
Okay. I'll go f-, I'll go. Thank you, um, I had a couple lined up for you and
you answered them in your intro, so-
(laughs) ... I was thinking, "Oh, what I'll ask." But no,
um- Maybe to try again.
Yeah. I've got a couple in mind for you. So, it's, um...
Uh, thank you for your time this afternoon too and thank you, um, to the
MPI team who are here again as well.
It's been a long day for you, I know. So, um, right.
I just wanted to ask you some questions with regard to the
roadmap-
Mm-hmm.
... that you, um, unveiled, um, in conjunction with the
industry. So, I'm keen to
know, um,
you've, you've talked about some of the support that the government's putting into
helping the in- industry double its exports by
2035. Um, you talk about
it being industry driven, the roadmap being industry
driven. What other support then is the government taking
responsibility for is, in, in that space, if anything at
all, whether financial or just in the way of
support?
Um, like I said, um, it... The success of this
roadmap will very much depend on industry getting involved
across its entirety. And of course you'll appreciate there's enormous
sectors within the sector, like kiwi and apple, and then there's the smaller
persimmons, for example, and then there growing and emerging industries like
blueberry and cherry. Um, so, so for our part,
um, we have to do... We have to look at the, at the bigger picture.
And so the... Of those 21 actions that, that, uh, down
to government responsibility, enabling water storage, absolutely
critical, um, and as I said before, support in that trade and
market access. There's no point growing those products if there's nowhere-
Mm-hmm.
... to send them off to. Um, and then as I said, the better access to new
chemicals, which, um, very much sits under, um, Minister Hager's
responsibility now, um, but he has, um, you know, got the
EPA organized, and sorry, the Minister for the Environment's got the EPA organized.
And they have been able to, I think, uh, deliver, improve the
backlog by about 30% to enable more access to chemicals
for those particular growers. That's just a couple of them.
Sure.
Okay.
Can I ask something on that one?
Yes.
Me go.
Yeah.
So, of those 20, uh, one government actions, so,
so to, uh, speak, um, have you got a timeline of
which you are trying to achieve getting those barriers out of the way?
I'm gonna have to refer to the officials on that.
So, each of the actions have got their own, um, own, own
timeline. Um, uh, Tim might have a copy of the
action plan and go through, but there's some stuff.
A lot of it's, um, aligned with existing government programs, so
like, um, the labor market, um, settings, um,
access to RAC workers.
so, uh, and that will be lined up with the, the work that the
government's, uh, already got and it's making sure that the
horticulture voice and the horticulture's-
(clears throat)
... um, priorities are actually, uh, properly
integrated and heard as those policies go forward.
So for example, the market access area is an area that
doesn't... It doesn't really stop, so what we'll do is we'll work
with the Plant Market Access Council, um, we'll
get... We'll work with them to identify what the market access
priorities are for the horticulture sector,
um, and, and there'll be a prioritization process on
depending on how ready they are to enter the market, the
analysis of the market in terms of the demand and
whether, um, there's any competing, um, country that's
trying to get those goods in. Does New Zealand have a, a, an
advantage on that? And based on that, that'll be used to prioritize
that. And then we'll work with that sector, um, to get
access, um, for those goods into those
markets. So we've had some success in Vietnam.
I think we're working on Pekaboo pears at the moment, going into the
Vietnam market. And so there'll be priorities for each of that.
So once we've knocked off Peka- Pekaboo pears, there'll be
another, um, uh, variety that will
then come through and fill that space.
Just another sub if you don't mind, Mr. Chair.
Um, so, uh, a, a number of the, uh, actions would
be a policy, um, bureaucracy, getting that sort of...
What, what about the ones that are potentially got, um,
large amounts of capital required towards it, such as you talked about water
storage and the-
Yeah.
... yeah, what, what's, what's the
... um, we've been working with them, um, as, to
help them build a plan about how they grow their sector and
how they meet some of the, the challenging areas around nutrient losses and so on,
and, and what can we do to help invest with them to help them sort of overcome some
of those challenges. And as Julie said, there will be
opportunities in various markets.
So I know, I know with the Chinese at the moment, I was there last week,
we are talking to them about onion axis into, into the China
market to help diversify. So we're quite exposed just
into one market into Indonesia. So we can, we can begin to do those things.
So I think with that, under that horticultural action plan, what we're trying to do
is help that sector grow and it's the small, small parts of the
sector that are more domestically focused as well as the, as the bigger, the fruit
parts are kind of quite well established like kiwifruit, apples and others.
Thank you.
Jo?
Thank you. Um, coming back to the roadmap, um, Minister,
I'm interested to know what criteria will be used to define
special agricultural areas that you've referred to,
um, uh, in media commentary around the,
um, the roadmap.
So that was consulted on as part of the 20th Plan for Land
consultations.
Yes.
You go. Uh-
Either or. Yeah, but I was going to say exactly that.
But, um, um, yes, as, as you'll be aware, the government's
indicated that, um, we can, intend to
remove land use class 3, um, from the
HPL, uh, MPS and HPL, um, but
where, except for where there is a natural grouping.
Um, it is still, uh, you know, we're obviously yet to see, um,
the, the new Resource Management Act presented to the
Parliament. Um, one would, um, one can,
I think, confidently predict that within that, there
will be, uh, national direction around what those designation of
those special agricultural areas will look like.
Mm.
Steve from Renewal?
Yep.
He's just (whispers) .
Um, good to have you here.
Hello.
Um,
we received submissions on the, uh, Plant Health
Environment Capability Facility from various
parties, and Horticulture New Zealand, uh, submitted they support
the, uh, facility being built, but they're
concerned about the import costs on
germplasm. Um,
MPI has initiated plant import system reform project,
um, and HortNZ are part of, an active collaborator, they
say. But they also say, "We believe this review,
um, is necessary as the current system is
slow, costly and stifles innovation."
Mm-hmm.
"For maximum benefit, the review should take a wide scope." And
they go on to say that, "Import systems cost structure are
worth revisiting to improve affordability for the industry while maintaining
high biosecurity standards, um, and that
significant fee increases may make importation
undesirable, particularly for smaller sectors." So I wonder how much
you're across the, um, the concerns
in the
importation of novel germplasm?
Yeah. Look, um, I, I will throw to Ray 'cause it is very much
operational and not actually my ministerial delegation.
However, um, it is a, a key concern that is raised
with me regularly by-
Right. ... the horticultural industry. Uh, and so I guess m- my job
in, in that instance is to convey those concerns to those
that run the operations, um, and, and see where we can
strike a better balance.
Yeah, I mean, we talked about it a little bit earlier today, but-
Yeah, we talked about the facility quite a lot.
It was-
Yeah, yeah. And, and I guess the, the, this is, this is
the sort of challenge in this is, um, the cost.
A- in order to bring
the material in, you've got to have a facility.
Yep.
Uh, in order to build a facility, it costs money.
Then you got to figure out who's benefiting
from this. So there's no doubt a benefit,
uh, at a taxpayer level generally, but not
100%. And so we, we've struck a new fee structure
that says, well, it is going to cost more, cost more than what they used to pay.
Uh, and so, you know, that hasn't, not everyone's thrilled with that, right?
Um, but some- somebody's got to pay for it and it can't just be
taxpayers. So, so
however, I think one of the things that we need to work a bit harder at, um,
I went and had a look at the facility the other day and these new glass
houses, and there's more to come. Uh, the way they're structured
now, you don't, you don't just have to hire a plant for your
imported asparagus stalk. You can mix
that with a range of common genuses and, and
therefore you can reduce the cost.
And I think these, there are some clever things we can do that actually can make
it, um, more viable. And the other thing is, we don't think in
all product types we have to have them in quarantine for as long as we used
to. So some we will, but not all, not all the types.
So we think there's ways of actually reducing the cost, but there's-
Sharing space.
Yeah, sharing space. There's just not enough information I think out there at the
moment. And there's, look, there's been some strong and hard lobbying by
those who, who have imported the most
that have taken up most of the space.
Mm-hmm.
Uh, and they've, they've been able to bring product in at a very low cost.
But there are a range of people that are using the facilities at the moment.
We just, I think had to build a bit of confidence with it.
I think it's a bit of a challenge on us
to get out there and show people what can be done and, and
to try to reduce the cost. On the import health standards stuff, that is, you know,
I think we all see it as... One area we think is going to help
us with that is, is the use of AI, but we will have to go carefully with
that. So if you wanted to import a new
varietal-
... and we had never done the study on what diseases
might manifest themselves in these varietals, uh,
internationally, then scientists could spend two years
researching, um, sort of like the pig research we were talking about.
You know?
(laughs)
Research and then trying to form a view about the likelihood of
those things coming and being present.
With AI tools, that part of the job probably can be cleaned up very,
very quickly and you come down to a lesser amount of analysis that would need to be
done. So, we think there are some,
some real opportunities with technology to kind of help speed up that
process, that, that will take the price out.
Thank you.
Very good.
Yep. Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair.
Um, uh, coming back to the, um, plan of
doubling the e- sector's exports in 20, by
2035, um, the high, the roadmap
high, high-level plan-
... to achieve that target talks about ensuring that Maori are
strong in horticulture and I'm interested to know what engagement you've
had with Maori in the horticultural sector and what you're doing as
minister to support that.
I've had a fair amount of engagement.
I've visited, uh, a number of Maori growers.
I've actually traveled overseas on various trade missions with the Prime Minister
and a number of Maori horticulturalists.
Um, there, as you'll know, there is a dedicated, uh, Maori business unit
within
MPI, um, and, and, you know, the roadmap itself
identifies the massive potential for Maori
horticulturalists.
Mm.
And so it stands to reason that the government would work alongside
those growers.
Mm.
Uh, and, you know, the likes of KANO, as and where it is,
uh, uh, appropriate and applicable, um, we encourage them to, to
take advantage of those opportunities to help develop, um,
things. You know, from, from small ideas and concepts
to, to, um, multinational businesses at
times. Um, so yeah, there's incredible opportunity, but, you
know, we're, we are really, really dedicated to, to
supporting that sector within the sector.
Thank you.
Sup?
Yeah. Well, well sort of, but-
All right.
... kind of related. Related to, related to horticulture (crosstalk)
Yeah.
... might be a sup anyway. But, um, uh, with
regard to the different, um,
uh, the different groups within the horticultural sector that,
um, that you referred to as fragmented, not in a, in a negative way.
I didn't use that word.
Not in a negative way, but you know, in a, in a...
Because there's so many different moving parts and so many different groups within
the hort sector.
Yeah. Mm-hmm.
Um, what are you, what are you doing to support the coordination of all of them to
sort of come together and, and, um, uh, work more closely
together for the benefit of the whole of the sector?
Well, it, it's a fine balancing act.
Again, I, I don't see that I have a ministerial
responsibility for that. Having said that, you know, we're the
sum of all our parts, right?
And so you want every single, um, sub-sector within the sector to
be doing well. Uh-
Mm.
... I think one of the very small, uh, initiatives that, that I
have established is, is just a regular quarterly update to
every single grower group-
Yeah. ... in the country.
Yeah.
Just to, um, identify and inform them of every single government
policy that-
Mm.
... that we all here are pushing through that Parliament.
Because so often things get lost and people don't actually
understand-
Mm.
... what has changed and, and what opportunities are in front of them.
Yeah.
So, I know it seems like a very small initiative, but it's actually been received
really, really well.
Yeah. Yeah.
Because thus far, government hadn't really been
communicating with all parts of the sector.
But-
Yeah.
... you know, then I would also throw to the responsibility of those grower
groups.
Mm.
Um, particularly those who, you know, who pay their commodity levies.
Uh, um, and so, you know, they have an obligation to be- best
represent their growers. But look, I can't speak highly enough of Horticulture New
Zealand.
Mm.
I think they do an exceptional job at uniting a, you
know, a vast array-
Yeah.
... of growers across the country, in sizes and shapes and all sorts of different
products. Uh, and I often say to grower groups, "You are really
well-represented by this organization."
Mm.
And, you know, and we're only as good as the information that we get given.
So, so I think HortNZ particularly are very, very good conduit between
those, those grassroots growers and, and us as government.
Yeah. Do you think that there's more opportunity, or could be potential for more
opportunity if they, um, were to perhaps all sort of come together and
coordinate a little bit more? You know, sort of like power in numbers, so to speak.
Do you think?
Well, it would depend on, on what their objective is.
Um, you know, what, what I would always do would be encourage
growers to, to look to the vast array of trade arrangements that we're beginning to
establish across the country-
Mm.
... across the gro- globe. And, you know, where there are, um,
opportunities to fill quotas and so on and so forth-
Mm.
... then, then I do encourage them to, to band together-
Yeah.
... create volume. Uh, but, you know, it, it is up to
them. There's... I suppose there's an ideological argument to have
between how much the long arm of government reaches into people's lives and into
their businesses.
But our, our job is, is to free up the regulations and the
restrictions to enable them to go and, you know,
make, make what they want to of, of the opportunity in front of them.
Mm.
Thank you.
Very good.
Further questions?
No. Well, it looks like we've finished.
Very good. That came from
Thank you, Minister.
... at the night facts in Canterbury.
(laughs)
Come on, Steve Avic.
Thank you. I'll take further questions.
(laughs)
Um, how, how much less does the horticulture
I was joking. (laughs)
(laughs) ... um, in terms of water pollution? It's a good question because, um...
(laughs)
Thank you.
Me and my big mouth.
I thought we'd finished.
So had
Oh, no. The minister wanted another question.
So-
(laughs)
The, the horticultural sector is a obvious
means of us producing
more direct human food from plant
products.
Mm-hmm.
That is part of what is recognized globally as
a solution to the big emissions component of livestock farming,
and the big pollution component-
Mm-hmm.
... from nitrates, as you allude to, which primarily comes from dairy (00:03:00) KU
run. Is that seen by the
government as an opportunity? If
we could make
farm gate profits from a hectare of horticultural activity,
and it might displace livestock activity, you haven't reduced
the country's productivity, you've changed the nature
of production.
Mm-hmm.
And
we did have, we do have AgriZero where we're investing
lots of money-
That's
right. ... in tech fixes-
Mm-hmm.
... but not doing the most known recognized
means to affect the emissions profile
livestock, which has moved to more plant-based production.
So, the big boost in horticulture that you've, you know,
outlined for us today,
does the government say, "Great. This helps us also meet our
climate targets"?
I, I, I will always maintain that it's an and/and, that we can
produce low emissions protein and we can produce low emissions
fruit and vegetables that are good for our people and good for the world and good
for the environment. I think we as a government take the view that
land use change is market driven. Um, pri-, you know,
providing it will, it falls within essential environmental
imperatives. But you are starting to see, and I can talk to Canterbury
particularly, um, that land use change naturally occurring.
Just recently I visited, um, a converted dairy farm
that's going into 250 hectares of apples.
Mm-hmm.
That's market driven. Um, and you know, it's just, just north of
Ashburton. So, I, I think, um, y-
th- it's, it's, it's business led, it's market led, but you know,
uh, protein producers, be it dairy, be it meat,
have to operate within environmental limitations.
And so, as do horticulturalists. And, and so I do believe we have, we
have the opportunity for an and/and with a very light footprint.
Yeah. But you do recognize that land use change in that direction
has
certainly a climate benefit and probably a water benefit too?
Um, I, I, I can see your point of view, but I will always,
um, support our dairy farmers particularly in
that they have as light a touch as possible on water and on
the environment simply because they cannot operate if they
don't.
Well, they currently can operate with a pretty intense touch.
No, I disagree.
I think, I think they're, they're managing their, um, footprint
incredibly well.
W- what about the nitrate emergency in Canterbury and the E.
coli emergency for that matter?
Well, again, I have absolutely no responsibility for that, but
I spoke out very strongly against it.
I think it was absolutely ludicrous, mischievous move
by some departing councilors leaving EICAN that served
no purpose other than to, um, to have a crack at
dairy farmers in Canterbury.
Do you think it's mi- mischievous for pregnant women to be concerned that
at five milligrams nitrate water could be increasing
the potential of them having a preterm birth by 47%?
No, I don't. But if you look to Ministry of Health data in the last 20
years, just two babies have presented to hospitals across this
country-
Mm-hmm.
... with what might be considered nitrate poisoning.
It has not been confirmed.
That's blue baby syndrome. But also the Ministry of Health advised in the
previous government that pregnant women
shouldn't drink high nitrate drinking water because it risks
deoxygenating the baby's blood-
And if they are drinking public supply, they won't be
drinking high nitrate water. If they are drinking off private
supply, they should probably be getting their water checked.
The Gore town exceeded the maximum acceptable value this
year.
Yes. And they got caught up on it very quickly.
And was above five milligrams, which is the level at which there is a risk to
preterm birth, which is different from the blue baby syndrome.
It got caught up on it very quickly.
Do you think there's a responsibility to warn people of that health risk?
Yeah, I do. But that was Gore. You asked me about EICAN. Yeah, I can be fair.
Yeah. Well, EICAN is also a risk over time.
Well, uh, EICAN tend to test boars that have had problems for 30
years. So this is not a new problem.
But it's worsening.
Depends on whose science you're following.
The, all, all the science (laughs) .
(laughs)
I mean all the independent science.
I think with all due respect, this has kind of deviated away from my ministerial
responsibility.
Sure. But I appreciate you, uh, allowing us to do that.
(laughs)
I have one very final question for you, Minister, um, that just
popped into my mind before you were having your conversation over there.
Um,
so a lot of the growers, particularly those in hot, hot houses, uh, (00:08:05)
glasshouses, that's, are captured in the ETS, um,
and, uh, had... I've had conversations with a grower in particular, a cucumber
grower, I think, from Kaiapoi who, um, the cost for
him to... 'cause it's a small family business-
Yep.
... um, to move away from what he is using traditionally
now to, I guess, heat the, um-
Coal.
Yeah. I don't know if it's coal or whatever it is, but, um-
(laughs)
... has there been any thinking or any work going on, um, in how, um,
government might support, uh, growers, the likes of those
sorts of growers to move to that cleaner, um,
form of heating that's not gonna break them?
Well, look, it's, um,
a lot of these growers are the unfortunate victim of,
of decisions that have been made by previous governments-
Mm-hmm. ... um, where there is a real insecurity in energy supply now.
Um, and yes, I have visited a number of them that are extremely
stressed about the cost of energy-
Yeah.
... and the cost of running their business, and also the cost of transitioning.
And a lot of them are using either coal-fired or diesel-
Yeah.
... powered heating systems.
Mm-hmm.
Um, and so we are... I think just recently you and Todd
McClay just went up to meet with a number of them, um, to talk about
how we can help enable that transition.
But, um, you know,
to be very blunt, there won't be government funding
invested in individual businesses to
transition- Not like the Giddy Fund? Something like the Giddy Fund,
There's no longer a Giddy Fund.
No, I know, there's not th- no longer, but something a little better.
But thank you. Thank you.
Very good. Thank you, Minister. It's done.
Thank you,
We're actually one minute over time, so there you go.
(laughs) I needed to make up as well.
Two
minutes over time. Thank you everyone. Appreciate the time.
Thank you, Minister. Thanks, Ray. See you tomorrow?
(laughs)
Well, you won't be sleeping.